Describing how to access data via xcube data stores (#13)
deepesdl/deepesdl-doc: docs/datasets/datastores.md

-   [xcube ESA CCI data store](#xcube-esa-cci-data-store)
-   [xcube Sentinel Hub data store](#xcube-sentinel-hub-data-store)
-   [xcube Copernicus Climate Change Service data store](#xcube-copernicus-climate-change-service-c3s-data-store)

## DeepESDL datasets in public object storage

The DeepESDL Consortium provides a growing number of datasets which are made 
analysis-ready and persisted in public object storage for easy access. 
An overview of available persisted datasets is given section 
[datasets](datasets.md). 

To access the DeepESDL persisted datasets, please follow the example: 

Initializing the xcube datastore for s3 object storage:
```python
from xcube.core.store import new_data_store
store = new_data_store("s3", 
                       root="deep-esdl-public", 
                       storage_options=dict(anon=True))
```
List all available datasets: 

```python
store.list_data_ids()
```

To open a certain dataset, please replace the path with the path to the 
desired dataset, which was listed in `store.list_data_ids()`

```python
dataset = store.open_data('black-sea-1x1024x1024.zarr')
```

## xcube CMEMS data store

> The xcube Copernicus Marine Data Store (CMEMS) data store allows to read and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The xcube Copernicus Marine Data Store (CMEMS) data store allows for reading and 
```

> explore data from the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exploring data from the 
```

[Copernicus Marine Data Store](https://data.marine.copernicus.eu/products).

> A user login is mandatory to access the data provided by CMEMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user login is required to access the data provided by CMEMS.
```

If you do not have cmems user yet, you can register for an 
[account](https://resources.marine.copernicus.eu/registration-form). 
For DeepESDL Jupyter Lab default credentials are configured, but due to 
bandwidth 

> limitation by CMEMS they might not be performant when used by several people

Reviewer: ```suggestion
limitation by CMEMS performance may impair when used by several people
```

simultaneously. 

To use your own CMEMS account:
```python
# replace with your user name and pwd
#cmemsuser='your-user-name'
#cmemspwd='your-user-password'
```
Initializing the xcube datastore for CMEMS:

```python
from xcube.core.store import new_data_store
store = new_data_store('cmems')
```

If you use your own CMEMS account: 

```python
# store = new_data_store('cmems', 
#                        cmems_user=cmemsuser, 
#                        cmems_user_password = cmemspwd)
# store = new_data_store('cmems')
```

List all available datasets: 

```python
store.list_data_ids()
```

To open a certain dataset, please replace the path with the path to the 
desired dataset, which was listed in `store.list_data_ids()`

```python
dataset = store.open_data('dataset-bal-reanalysis-wav-hourly',
                          'dataset:zarr:cmems')
```

## xcube ESA CCI data store

> The xcube ESA Climate Change Initiative (CCI) data store allows to read and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The xcube ESA Climate Change Initiative (CCI) data store allows for reading and 
```

> explore data from the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exploring data from the 
```

[ESA Climate Change Initiative](https://climate.esa.int/en/esa-climate/esa-cci/).
More information on the data sets offered can be found in the
[Open Data Portal](https://climate.esa.int/en/odp/#/dashboard).

Initializing the xcube datastore for CCI:

```python
from xcube.core.store import new_data_store
store = new_data_store('cciodp')
```

The cci datastore offers many datasets, therefore listing all available ones 

> will not be very useful. The store can be searched by specific search 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will reveal a long list of results. The store can thus be searched by specific 
```

parameters, which can be listed:

```python
store.get_search_params_schema()
```

> Once one has decided which dataset to access, it can be opened similar to the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A target data set can then be be opened following the below schema  
```

example below:

```python
dataset = store.open_data('esacci.SST.day.L4.SSTdepth.multi-sensor.multi-platform.OSTIA.2-1.sst',
                          variable_names=['analysed_sst'],
                          time_range=['1981-08-31','2016-12-31'])

```

## xcube Sentinel Hub data store

> The xcube Sentinel Hub (SH) data store allows to read and explore data from the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The xcube Sentinel Hub (SH) data store allows for reading and exploring data provided by the 
```

[Sentinel Hub cloud API](https://www.sentinel-hub.com/).

> **Please note:** In order to access data from Sentinel Hub, you need Sentinel 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Please note:** In order to access data from the commercial Sentinel Hub service, you need Sentinel 
```

Hub API credentials. 

> Within DeepESDL there is the possibility to apply for Sentinel Hub access - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DeepESDL users may apply for sponsored Sentinel Hub subscriptions - 
```

> please contact the DeepESDL team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
please contact the DeepESDL team or directly appy via the [Network of Resources portal](https://nor-discover.cloudeo.group/Service/EDC-Sentinel-Hub/SponsoringWizardPricelist).

```

                          spatial_res=0.00018, 
                          time_range=('2020-08-10','2020-08-20'), 
                          time_period='1D',
                          tile_size= [1024, 1024])
```

## xcube Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) data store

The xcube [Climate Data Store](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu) (CDS)
allows to read and explore temperature data from the Copernicus Climate 
Change Service (C3S). 

To access data from the Climate Data Store, you need a CDS API key. You can 
obtain the UID and API key as follows:

1.    Create a user account on the [CDS Website](https://cds.climate.copernicus.
eu/user/register).
2.    Log in to the website with your user name and password.
3.    Navigate to your user profile on the website. Your API key is shown 
      at the bottom of the page.

Then export the `CDSAPI_URL` and `CDSAPI_KEY` environment variables, 
replacing `[UID]` and `[API-KEY]` with the actual values from your account:

```bash
export CDSAPI_URL=https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/api/v2
export CDSAPI_KEY=[UID]:[API-KEY]
```

For DeepESDL Jupyter Lab default credentials are configured, but due to 

> bandwidth limitation by CDS they might not be performant when used by several 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bandwidth limitation by CDS performance may impair when used by several 
```
